\documentclass[]{article}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \ifxetex
    \usepackage{mathspec}
  \else
    \usepackage{fontspec}
  \fi
  \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=MatchLowercase}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{%
\usepackage{microtype}
\UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\hypersetup{unicode=true,
            pdfborder={0 0 0},
            breaklinks=true}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls
\usepackage{longtable,booktabs}
\IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
\usepackage{parskip}
}{% else
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{0}
% Redefines (sub)paragraphs to behave more like sections
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
\let\oldparagraph\paragraph
\renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
\let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
\renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi

\date{}

\begin{document}

\subsection{Components}\label{components}

\subsubsection{Modelling principles}\label{modelling-principles}

C1: Provide detailed documentation

{[}priority: medium{]} {[}partial check: CMDValidate{]}

There are various places in a component or profile specification that
can be used to document your definitions. The \emph{description} of a
component or profile (at the very top of the Component Editor) should be
used to summarise its context and usage scenario as envisioned by the
modeller. The best way to communicate the \emph{semantics} of the
components, elements and attributes within a specification is by means
of a well chosen concept link (see \protect\hyperlink{concepts}{section}
below). The ``\emph{Documentation''} fields that are also available for
all of these should contain more `operational' information, for example
where or how to obtain an appropriate value or what `soft' constraints
or guidelines apply that are not covered by the value scheme or
cardinality of the documented item. It can also be used to clarify the
semantics in case the best fitting concept is too broad or no matching
concept can be found.

\subsubsection{Naming}\label{naming}

C2: Components, element and attribute names should be in English

{[}priority: medium{]}

Since English is the de facto standard language within CLARIN, and most
components and profiles are already defined using English names for
components, elements and attributes, it is considered best practice to
use English for any new component or profile. This contributes to
reusability since it is not desirable for profiles or components to be
defined in multiple languages. Moreover, metadata creators are most
likely to accept or prefer profiles defined using English constituents.

Note that using English names for your components, elements and
attributes does not mean that the values necessarily have to be in
English. CMDI has explicit support for multilinguality; see the section
on
\href{../common_approachesproblems/multilingual_metadata.md}{Multilingual
metadata}.

C3: Be verbose, avoid abbreviations and acronyms

{[}priority: medium{]}

When naming elements, attributes and in particular components, be
verbose to a rasonable extent. This to make sure any metadata modeller
or creator understands their purpose. For example ``SignLanguageCorpus''
is more likely to be understood than ``SL-Corpus''. Some very common and
generally understood abbreviations can be used, such as ``info'' for
information or ``param'' for parameter.

To some degree, exceptions can also be made for the names of projects or
institutions, in particular if the abbreviation constitutes the common
reference to such an entity and the full name is rather long (e.g.
``Institut f√ºr Deutsche Sprache'' versus IDS). In general, this only
applies to the profile level. Reusable components should be defined to
be reusable across institutions and projects and the naming should
reflect that.

The same goes for formats or standards that are referenced, for example
in the case of a CMDI profile that models the OLAC or MODS format. In
such cases, it is strongly recommended to include a fully expanded
version of the abbreviated name in the component description or
element/attribute documentation.

C4: Avoid project specific terminology

{[}priority: medium{]}

Unless strictly necessary, do not use terminology or name variations
that link a component or one of its constituents to your project. If you
create an extended version of an existing component, for example by
adding an element or attribute, do not include your project name in the
name of your new component unless the adaptation completely restricts
its usage to the context of your project. You can use the `group'
property of component to distinguish new components from similarly named
existing ones, and include the name of your project in there, if
desired.

C5: Aim for a uniform naming pattern but don't let it stand in the way
of using existing components

{[}priority: low{]} {[}partial check: CMDValidate{]}

As a metadata modeller, you will come across various naming patterns. By
following the naming pattern recommendations below you have the best
chance of reaching a largely uniform style within your components and
profiles. However, when looking for existing components to use there is
a good chance that you will come across deviating naming patterns.
Although less aesthetically pleasing, this should not prevent you from
reusing a specific component. When creating a new version of an existing
component or profile (for example adding elements that you require but
are absent from the original) you may want to consider fixing the naming
style to match the recommendation below.

The most important thing is to use a naming pattern that is as
consistent as possible across your profile and component definitions.
This may mean that the best choice is to adopt an existing `style' based
on the components you are reusing or recycling. In other cases, we
suggest using ``UpperCamelCase'' for components (starting with an
uppercase letter) and ``lowerCamelCase'' (starting with lowercase) for
elements and attributes, then capitalise every subsequent first
character of the individual words in a name. Whitespace is not allowed.
Avoid alternative styles such as ``snake case'' (for example
``Example\_Profile\_Instance'') and ``train case''
(``Example-Profile-Instance''). Acronyms can be separated from the rest
of a name for readability with a hyphen, for example
``LAT-SignLanguageSession''.

\hypertarget{constraints-and-value-schemes}{\subsubsection{Constraints
and value schemes}\label{constraints-and-value-schemes}}

C6: Discourage empty string values

{[}priority: low{]} {[}\emph{TODO: check: CMDI Instance Validator}{]}

When making an element or attribute mandatory and give it the simple
type ``string'', this should imply the requirement of a non-empty value.
In other words, do not encourage the creation of empty elements or
attributes in the metadata but rather consider making an element or
attribute optional.

C7: Use an appropriately restrictive value scheme

{[}priority: medium{]} {[}check CMDValidate{]}

Don't use string type if a more specific type can be used.

C8: Prefer elements over attributes

{[}priority: low{]} {[}check: CMDValidate{]}

Attributes generally serve as place to annotate, i.e.~provide
information about the content of their parent element or component,
which is a relatively rare requirement. Attributes lack a number of
features that are available on elements, such as the option of being
multilingual (as attributes cannot be annotated), the usage of value
concept links (for the same reason) and have a maximum cardinality of
one. Therefore attributes should only be introduced if there is an
actual need to provide `meta-metadata', for example to indicate a degree
of uncertainty regarding a value, or to specify a unit of measure.
Always consider grouping closely related information (such as language
name and language code) in a component rather than making one
information item an attribute of the other.

C9: Prefer vocabularies over booleans

{[}priority: medium{]} {[}check: CMDValidate{]}

Many aspects described in metadata are of a binary nature. For example,
a resource may be openly available or not; or a record may represent
either a ''branch'' or a ``leaf''' in a hierarchical collection. It may
be tempting to model this using the \emph{boolean} value scheme, for
example by means of a field ``publiclyAvailable'' or ``collectionLeaf''
that takes either ``true'' or ``false'' as its value. However, be aware
that this approach makes the semantics of the value more opaque than
necessary. By creating a vocabulary containing two (or more)
concept-specific values, you can provide explicit semantics to the
values. For example, in comparison to the examples given above, a field
`availability' could have value scheme `public' / `restricted'; a field
`collectionLevel' could have `branch' / 'leaf'. Provide concept links
for the vocabulary items if available.

\subsubsection{Reuse and recycling}\label{reuse-and-recycling}

C10: Model components with broad reusability in mind

{[}priority: high{]}

When creating a new component, try not to model only for your specific
needs but also consider potential other applications of your component.
The reason you are creating a new component is that all existing ones
were too generic or too specific. Evaluate similar components candidates
and the reasons they do not fit your needs, and see if similar arguments
against using them could be applied to your component. Things to look at
are:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  generic naming (see the Naming best practices above);
\item
  granularity; try to cover just one aspect with your component, or a
  particular, common combination of aspects by combining other
  independent components
\item
  permissiveness of cardinalities; if \emph{you} don't \emph{need}
  multiple instances of a field for your particular use case, that
  doesn't mean that an upper bound of 1 is always the best choice - as
  long as multiple values are conceptually sound, do not exclude such
  use cases unnecessarily (also see
  \protect\hyperlink{constraints-and-value-schemes}{Constraints and
  value schemes} best practices above)
\end{itemize}

C11: Reuse or recycle components where possible

{[}priority: high{]} {[}check: CMDValidate{]}

The power of the CMDI model lies in the possibility of reusing and
recombining components. Metadata modellers can benefit from the effort
that other modellers put into designing, documenting and semantically
annotating CMDI components. Existing components, in particular the
\textbf{recommended} ones (see section \emph{TODO: Recommendations})
have been tested in practice and have a good chance of being optimised
for e.g.~facet mapping in the VLO. Therefore it is advised to always
look for existing components that fully or partially meet your
requirements (see \href{./workflow.md}{Workflow}). Multiple existing
components can be combined into new components (reused) if they fit, and
optionally new components can be created using existing components as a
template (this can be referred to as `recycling'), for example when
additional elements within a component are required or different
cardinalities are desired.

\emph{TODO: Contact the owner of a component to discuss the needed
changes, which could lead to a revision of the component. This process
could be supported (partially) by the Component Registry. At the moment,
the conversation will in general have to be initiated via the registry
maintainer (contact: cmdi@clarin.eu).}

It may not always be clear if an existing component can serve as a good
basis for a new component. In some cases the better option may actually
turn out to be to create a component from scratch. Although it is hard
to draw a clear line that is generally applicable, we can provide some
guidelines as to whether a component \textbf{can} be considered fit for
``recycling'':

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  The only required change is the insertion (at any point in the
  structure) or deletion of one or more elements, attributes or
  components. In case of deletion being the only required change, do
  consider \emph{reusing} the component.
\item
  OR: a majority of child components, elements and attributes can be
  retained as is (possibly with a change in order)
\item
  OR: all or nearly all child components, elements and attributes can be
  retained (possibly with a change in order) but one or more need to be
  enriched (e.g.~adding a concept link or documentation) or slightly
  modified (change in cardinality or multilingual property) or replaced
  (in case of a linked component)
\end{itemize}

The following signs indicate that a given component may \textbf{not} be
a suitable template for a new component with specific requirements:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  A majority of child components, elements and attributes would need to
  be removed or modified
\item
  The concept link of the component itself needs to be changed to one
  that is not closely related to the original one (an indication that
  the component is semantically too distinct from the one required)
\item
  The component does not comply with one or more best practices in a way
  that can be resolved with small adaptations in the new component
\end{itemize}

\subsubsection{Value vocabularies}\label{value-vocabularies}

C12: Prefer controlled vocabularies

{[}priority: medium{]} {[}check: CMDValidate{]}

In order to minimize inconsistencies regarding the selection of values
as well as variance due to spelling conventions or typing errors,
metadata modellers should provide specifications for the vocabulary
intended as element and attribute contents wherever possible.

The best way to provide a vocabulary is by referencing an existing
vocabulary of the CLARIN Vocabulary Access Service (CLAVAS).\footnote{See
  \url{https://vocabularies.clarin.eu/clavas/}} In case CLAVAS does not
contain a suitable vocabulary for a considered domain it is possible to
propose a new vocabulary for CLAVAS. In that case please contact:
\href{mailto:cmdi@clarin.eu}{\nolinkurl{cmdi@clarin.eu}}. Note, however,
that the person or group proposing a vocabulary to CLAVAS has to take
the responsibility for maintaining it or for securing its long-term
maintenance.

A CLAVAS vocabulary can be used as a closed or open vocabulary. Use an
open vocabulary if MD providers should still be able to use individual
(not predefined) vocabulary items. The open vocabulary then represents a
set of suggestions for vocabulary items that should be considered. Be
aware, however, that this does not restrict metadata creators to these
suggestions, i.e.~they can introduce variant spellings of semantically
equivalent values. Another way to restrict the vocabulary is to provide
fixed value lists for elements or attributes. This is the recommended
procedure for centre-specific vocabularies. Centres should, however,
endeavour to use generic labels which can be interpreted or even re-used
outside the centre's reach (see
\href{/modelling_component_metadata/README.md\#m1}{M1}).

Furthermore, the CLARIN Component Registry offers the option to provide
patterns conveying coventions for the style of value strings or to
specify the datatype of a value (e.g.~if it should be a date, time,
integer, or boolean) (see
\protect\hyperlink{constraints-and-value-schemes}{Constraints and value
schemes}). If none of the above ways is feasible, it should be
considered to use means for checking, external to the CMDI
infrastructure (e.g.~Schematron constraints) while keeping the CMDI
profile unrestrictive with regard to element and attribute values.

C13: Provide a concept link for each vocabulary item

{[}priority: high{]} {[}check: CMDValidate{]}

A vocabulary included in CMDI might consist of a link to an external
vocabulary (in general a CLAVAS vocabulary) or an enumeration of
vocabulary items. In case of the latter, add a Concept Link to each item
of the proposed vocabulary to determine its semantics (see
\protect\hyperlink{c14}{C14}). If a semantically matching concept cannot
be found a new or modified concept can be requested (see
\protect\hyperlink{c19}{C19}).

\hypertarget{concepts}{\subsubsection{Concepts}\label{concepts}}

\begin{longtable}[c]{@{}l@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.05\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
TODO
\strut\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.05\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
How to select a matching (semantically close enough) concept? When do
you need to suggest a new concept?
\strut\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

In CMDI the semantics of all building blocks, e.g., components, elements
and values, can be made explicit by adding a concept link. Such a link
refers to an entry in a semantic registry, typically the CLARIN Concept
Registry (CCR).\footnote{See \url{https://concepts.clarin.eu/ccr/}}
Central parts of the CLARIN infrastructure use this semantic overlay to
overcome the heterogeneity in both structure and naming of profiles and
components.

C14: Add concept links to all elements, attributes and vocabulary items

{[}priority: high{]} {[}CLARIN B Centre requirement: 6.9.b{]} {[}check:
CMDValidate{]}

As a basis the semantics of most values in a metadata record should be
made explicit. This is done by adding concept links to both elements and
attributes. And where possible to the value itself, i.e., adding concept
links to closed/open vocabulary items. If a semantically matching
concept cannot be found a new or modified concept can be requested (see
\protect\hyperlink{c19}{C19}).

Reusing existing components will, in many cases, bring along concept
links, potentially already optimised for mapping to VLO facets. In case
you have to assess this mapping yourself it is good to inspect the
existing VLO concept to facet mapping at
\href{http://vlo.clarin.eu/mapping}{vlo.clarin.eu/mapping}.

C15: Add concept links to salient components

{[}priority: medium{]} {[}partial check: CMDValidate{]}

Values, attributes and elements always exist within a component. Such a
component, and possible ancestor components, can be used to provide
semantic context. For example, the component `Actor' provides the role a
person plays within the metadata record. However, sometimes CMDI forces
one to introduce an intermediate component that covers only data
structuring needs, with but no semantic use. For example, a
`description' component that contains a `description' element. There is
no need to attach concept links to such components. Next to such corner
cases a good general approach is to add a concept link to at least the
`root component' of a reusable component.

TODO: C16: Refer to approved concepts

{[}priority: medium{]} {[}\emph{TODO: check: CMDValidate}{]}

C17: Refer to a concept that is ``as generic as possible but as specific
as needed''

{[}priority: high{]}

As is the case with naming and structuring components and elements
concept links should also be as generic as possible, i.e., foster reuse
of the component by not pinpointing the semantics too specifically. For
example, a generic `person name' concept can be used without indication
of the role the person plays within the component or profile. However, a
general name concept might not be suited as it needs to be explicit that
it is a person's name. But see \protect\hyperlink{c15}{C15} to still use
generic concepts and add specific semantics using the context.

C18: Refer to a persistent semantic registry

{[}priority: high{]} {[}CLARIN B Centre requirement: 6.9.b{]} {[}check:
CMDValidate{]}

The preferred semantic registry of CLARIN is the CCR. This registry
issues persistent identifiers to its entries and thus concept links in
CMDI are stable even when the underlying technology of the registry
changes. Next to the CCR also the Dublin Core elements or terms, which
use PURLs as persistent identifiers, are considered stable enough. If
you consider to refer to another semantic registry please contact the
CCR Content Coordinators\footnote{See \url{https://www.clarin.eu/ccr/}}
so the persistency of the registry can be assessed and the use of its
(persistent) identifiers as concept links can be considered.

C19: If no matching concept can be found suggest a new or modified
concept

{[}priority: medium{]}

Although the CCR concepts and the Dublin Core elements/terms already
cover a lot of use cases one might encounter the need for a new concept,
or would like to adapt a CCR concept just a little bit to make it fit
better. The new concept specification, in the form of a preferred name
and definition, or the modification should be suggested to the CCR
Content Coordinators. More detailed guidelines for a good quality
concept specification can be found in the
\href{https://www.overleaf.com/read/pxnsftbcphhb}{CCR manual}.

The semantic richness, in the form of concept links, is also part of the
quality assessment of a component and profile (see
\href{/modelling_component_metadata/workflow.md}{workflow} section
below).

\end{document}
