# Common approaches/problems {#common-approaches-problems}

## Modelling for metadata conversion

For various reasons metadata modellers might be tempted to base their profile on the style of an existing metadata standard. However, following the style of an existing metadata scheme usually brings to light incompatibilities which force users to deviate either from the best practises at hand or, in case inherent CMDI restrictions are affected, from the source metadata scheme. It is therefore generally not recommended to rebuild an existing metadata scheme in CMDI with regard to not only its contents but also its style. Rather, metadata modellers should avoid restrictions from other formats in order to create CMDI profiles which meet the restrictions and best practises of the CMDI framework extensively. However, users might want to consult existing metadata standards for inspiration on the which metadata to include for a certain resource type and thus base their CMDI profile on an existing metadata scheme only with regard to which set of metadata information to consider.

Nevertheless, there may be cases where it is inevitable to base profile modelling on an existing metadata scheme \(e.g. if metadata should be convertable back and forth from the one format to the other\). In that case it might be necessary to violate some of the best practices at hand. Such deviations might concern e.g. cardinality, allowing for more optional elements than usual; the usage of attributes instead of elements as specified in the source scheme; domain specific or abbreviated naming of components, attributes or elements, etc. Such deviations from the best practices should, however, be kept to a minimum and should be documented and made known to potential users of the respective profile.

